---
layout: post.html
title: "25 Reasons to Spirit Siege Day 24: Art design"
tags: [spirit_siege, 25_reasons_to_spirit_siege]
summary: "Reason number 24 of #25ReasonsToSpiritSiege: Support talented artists working hard to make something attractive, cute and unique."
---

This post is part of the [#25ReasonsToSpiritSiege]({{ get_url('2014/09/01/Spirit_Siege_Day_1/index.html') }}) series. Click that link for a summary!

The penultimate reason of my 25 reasons to support Spirit Siege is one that's important to me personally: the art and graphic design. It's been my partner's main visible contribution and it's come a long way since she's been part of the team, but there are bigger changes planned that I think will really allow her to bring some of her most unique and impressive skills to bear on it.

I'll share one of the pieces of *Spirit Siege*'s design that my partner is justifiably most proud of: the plinths. If you've watched [gameplay videos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w1CgPs3eZXo), you may have noticed that as the units on the field get damaged, the platforms they're standing on (these are the "plinths", in case you don't know this somewhat obscure word) get shorter and shorter until they're flush with the ground and the unit is destroyed. That's a design element of my partner's devising, and she had to fight tooth and nail to get it included. But consider the "safe" standard alternative of having a little health bar for each unit and how unavoidably cluttered it would be to have to pack one onto every space with a unit on an already somewhat busy playing field. (You don't need to imagine that, you can see it in this [old video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0OljdZ24hZg).) My partner's solution conveys the same information without adding visual noise, instead taking further advantage of the plinths that are already a good-looking way to see who controls what unit, and also adding visual interest by having everyone on the playing field be at different heights. It's *elegant*, a word I [already used to describe the game mechanics]({{ get_url('2014/09/02/Spirit_Siege_Day_2/index.html') }}) but that applies quite nicely here too.

From the special information that I am privy to because of my cohabitation with one of the primary movers in _Spirit Siege_'s art direction, I gather that there may be even bolder and more exciting design changes in its future. And I think they will allow my partner to really flex some creative muscles and create a look for _Spirit Siege_ that will be as attractive as it is now but more striking and distinctive. (If you're reading this, Jenn: No pressure!)

But I should give shout outs to the other artists who've contributed hugely to _Spirit Siege_'s visual style too: the character artist who cranks out incredibly cute and consistent little people and beasties at an astonishing rate and the effects artist who gives the battlefield goings-on a playful, dynamic spin. All the artists working on this game are super talented and hardworking and you should [support them by backing it on Kickstarter.](http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1796662059/spirit-siege-your-five-minute-strategy-game-fix)